# Non-REM sleep in major depressive disorder

Code accompanying the main manuscript on non-REM sleep in major depressive disorder

## Manuscript abstract

Disturbed sleep is a key symptom in major depressive disorder (MDD). REM sleep alterations are well described in the current literature, but little is known about non-REM sleep alterations. Additionally, sleep disturbances relate to a variety of cognitive problems in MDD, but which features of non-REM sleep EEG contribute to this, remains unknown. We comprehensively analyzed non-REM sleep EEG features in three independently collected datasets (N=284). These included MDD patients with a broad age range, varying duration and severity of depression, unmedicated or medicated, as well as healthy age- and gender-matched control participants. The analysis explored changes in sleep architecture including sleep stages and cycles, spectral power, sleep spindles, slow waves (SW) and slow wave-spindle coupling i.e. the most comprehensive non-REM sleep analysis, using the largest polysomnographic MDD sample published to date. In addition, we analyzed the influence of these sleep features on acute measures of depression severity as well as overnight consolidation of a procedural memory task. Overall, no major systematic alterations in coarse non-REM sleep structure of patients were found. For non-REM sleep EEG microstructure, we observed a higher spindle amplitude in unmedicated patients compared to controls, and after start of antidepressant medication longer SWs with lower amplitude and a more dispersed SW-spindle coupling. Overnight procedural memory consolidation was impaired in medicated patients and associated with lower sleep spindle density. Our findings suggest that alterations in non-REM sleep EEG might be more subtle than previously reported and partly due to antidepressant medication and age.
